---
title: "Tea Light Message"
date: 2024-07-13T17:43:17-04:00
weight:
thumbnail: "tea-light.jpg"
summary: "A message magically appears as a candle warms up."
---

In this puzzle, the players are presented with what appears to be an
ordinary tea light candle.

{{< example-image src="candle-unlit.jpg" >}}

The candle is lit for the players, and for a while it is just a normal
candle like any other prop. But if the players happen to look back at the
candle later, they might notice something forming in the wax.

{{< example-image src="candle-hazy.jpg" >}}

Later, the candle's wax becomes completely clear, and the message is
clearly visible.

{{< example-image src="candle-clear.jpg" >}}

This challenge does not require the players to solve anything. Rather this
is a hidden item that is difficult to find even though it is clearly placed
among the game items. It is difficult because when the players first start
the game, the message cannot be seen and, after an initial glance, the
players may not take a close enough look again. Plus, it is just a fun
effect.

This puzzle is created by deconstructing a tea light candle and placing a
paper with the message drawn on it underneath the wax. Start with a fresh
tea light (with uncolored wax) and pop the wax out of its metal bowl.

{{< example-image src="remove-wax.jpg" >}}

Next, cut out a piece of paper in a circle that can fit at the bottom of
the metal bowl. Plain white copy paper works well. (The paper will not burn
as long as you don't let the candle burn all the way out, and you will have
plenty of time before that.) You can use wax to trace out the shape.

{{< example-image src="trace-wax.jpg" >}}

After tracing the circle, cut out the paper and write the message on the
paper. Place the paper against the wax with the message pressed against the
wax and then place the wax, wick, and message back in the metal bowl with
the message on the bottom.

{{< example-image src="replace-wax.jpg" >}}

The tea light candle is now ready to be lit.

Note that in the pictures above, I've taken out the wick, fed the wick
through a hole in the paper, and placed the paper between the wax and the
base of the wick. In the tea lights I was using, the wick was not attached
to the wax (before it was lit). In other tea lights, the wax is already
melted to the wick. If this is the case, you probably won't be able to
remove the wick without breaking it. In this case, you can probably just
put the paper under both wax and wick. Just make sure none of the message
is underneath the wick base.

I recommend testing this before using it in your escape room. The main
thing to get right is making sure the timing works well. When I first built
mine, I found that it took between 1 hr and 1 1/2 hr to fully see the
writing on the paper. This is too long as your escape room will probably
finish in this time.

I worked around this problem by lighting the candle before the escape room
and waiting the 1 - 1 1/2 hr to see the message and then blow the candle
out. When the candle cools down, the wax will become opaque again and the
message will be obscured. When I lit it again for the escape room, it now
only took about 30 minutes to become clear. You might be able to quicken
the time by removing some of the wax instead, but it will likely be hard to
do precisely.

At any rate, there will be a long delay between when the candle is lit and
when the message is visible. As such, it is probably not fair to make the
players light the candles as part of the puzzle. First, players have no way
of knowing if their actions are helping solve the puzzle. Second, a puzzle
that requires players to wait around for 30 minutes will not be very fun.
Instead, light the candle as players enter the room. It works best to make
this part of the escape room scenario (for example like the [ghost chasers
escape room]).

[ghost chasers escape room]: /rooms/ghost-chasers/#scenario
